\subsubsection{Normalization}

The extracted configuration is subsequently transformed into the ACM metamodel.

Each recovered artifact is converted into a typed Agentic Configuration Item (ACI) using the corresponding ACM schema. Logical identifiers, revisions, canonical content digests and explicit relationships are generated according to the rules defined by the reference model.

Framework-specific concepts that possess a direct ACM equivalent are translated without semantic modification. When no exact equivalent exists, the implementation preserves the original information through provenance metadata rather than introducing framework-dependent constructs into the governance model.

This normalization phase establishes a canonical representation independently of the source framework, allowing all subsequent governance operations to manipulate homogeneous ACM objects.

\subsubsection{Reference Resolution}

After normalization, the implementation resolves every declared reference between ACIs.

This step verifies that all mandatory references correspond to existing revisions and that every dependency required by the configuration graph can be resolved deterministically. Missing or inconsistent references are recorded as structural validation problems before any governance computation is performed.

Reference resolution therefore guarantees that lifecycle propagation, assurance computation and eligibility evaluation operate on a coherent configuration graph.

\subsubsection{Structural Validation}

The normalized graph is then validated against the ACM specification.

Structural validation verifies the integrity of the configuration independently of runtime behaviour. Typical checks include schema conformance, identifier consistency, graph connectivity where required, reference validity and the evaluation of normative invariants defined by the ACM specification.

The reference implementation deliberately separates structural validation from governance evaluation. Consequently, configuration integrity is established before any propagation algorithm computes derived states.

\subsubsection{Governance Computation}

Once the configuration has been validated, the governance kernel computes the effective governance state of every ACI.

The implementation first evaluates intrinsic information attached to each revision, including lifecycle, quality and assurance states. It subsequently derives computed states through deterministic propagation across the normalized configuration graph. Impact, eligibility and effective states are therefore calculated rather than directly stored.

The propagation engine iterates until a fixed point is reached, ensuring that identical normalized configurations always produce identical governance results. Because the computation operates exclusively on ACM objects, the resulting governance state is independent of the framework from which the configuration originated.

\subsubsection{Runtime Integration}

Configuration governance remains independent from execution throughout the entire pipeline.

During execution, supported frameworks emit normalized runtime signals through dedicated runtime adapters. These signals are recorded separately from the configuration graph and subsequently used to reconstruct runtime graphs, replay executions and detect configuration drift without altering the immutable baseline from which the execution originated.

This separation between configuration extraction and runtime observation preserves one of the fundamental principles of ACM: governance is performed over immutable configuration revisions, whereas execution remains represented through append-only runtime evidence.

Overall, the projection pipeline establishes a deterministic transformation from heterogeneous framework descriptions to a unified governance representation. Framework-specific complexity is confined to extraction and normalization, while validation, lifecycle management, assurance computation, provenance handling and state propagation are entirely delegated to the framework-independent ACM governance kernel.

```latex
\subsection{Framework Adapters}
\label{sec:framework_adapters}

The ACM reference implementation deliberately separates framework-specific extraction from framework-independent governance through a small adapter layer. Adapters are responsible for translating native framework objects into normalized ACM representations while preserving the configuration information explicitly available in the source framework. They neither execute workflows nor modify their behavior.

This design follows one of the fundamental principles introduced in Section~\ref{sec:design_principles}: framework-specific knowledge is confined to projection, whereas lifecycle management, validation, provenance, assurance and state propagation remain entirely implemented by the ACM governance kernel.

The current reference implementation includes adapters for LangGraph and CrewAI. These two frameworks were selected because they represent distinct orchestration paradigms while remaining sufficiently mature to evaluate the expressiveness of the ACM metamodel.

\subsubsection{Adapter Responsibilities}

Every adapter implements the same logical projection process independently of the underlying framework.

Its responsibilities are limited to:

\begin{enumerate}
    \item discovering the native configuration objects exposed by the framework;
    \item extracting their declared configuration;
    \item reconstructing explicit relationships between configuration elements;
    \item producing normalized ACM entities;
    \item reporting projection diagnostics whenever information cannot be represented exactly.
\end{enumerate}

Conversely, adapters do not:

\begin{itemize}
    \item evaluate lifecycle states;
    \item compute propagated governance states;
    \item perform assurance evaluation;
    \item apply ACM policies;
    \item modify the extracted workflow.
\end{itemize}

Consequently, every governance decision is delegated to the ACM kernel after projection has completed.

\subsubsection{LangGraph Projection}

LangGraph provides an explicit graph-based execution model whose nodes and transitions can be projected almost directly onto the ACM configuration graph.

The adapter identifies workflow definitions together with their constituent execution nodes and declared transitions. Agent definitions, prompts, tools and model configurations referenced by the workflow are extracted as independent configuration items linked through explicit ACM relationships.

Because the execution graph is explicitly represented by LangGraph, the projection preserves most structural dependencies without requiring semantic reconstruction. Native graph connectivity therefore becomes the primary source for the ACM configuration graph, while execution semantics remain represented exclusively by runtime events.

The adapter also records the provenance of every extracted object, allowing each normalized ACI to be traced back to the originating LangGraph definition.

\subsubsection{CrewAI Projection}

CrewAI exposes a substantially different configuration model based on agents, tasks, crews and, in the current implementation, flows.

Unlike LangGraph, workflow structure is not always represented as an explicit execution graph. The adapter therefore reconstructs the configuration graph from the declarative relationships expressed by CrewAI objects.

Agent definitions become ACM AgentDefinition objects, tasks are translated into workflow-related configuration items, while declared agent-task assignments and crew composition are represented through explicit ACM relationships.

Whenever the source framework does not expose an explicit dependency, the adapter does not infer one heuristically. Instead, the missing information is reported through projection diagnostics, preserving the distinction between observed configuration and inferred knowledge.

This conservative strategy ensures that ACM never attributes semantics that are absent from the original framework.

\subsubsection{Projection Fidelity}

The objective of an adapter is not to maximize the amount of reconstructed information but to maximize the fidelity of the normalized representation with respect to the source framework.

For every projected object, three situations may occur.

\begin{enumerate}
    \item The native concept has a direct ACM equivalent and is preserved without semantic transformation.
    \item The native concept can be represented using several ACM objects while preserving its observable semantics.
    \item No exact ACM representation currently exists. In this case the original information is retained as provenance or projection metadata rather than being approximated.
\end{enumerate}

This distinction is important for the experimental evaluation presented in Section~\ref{sec:evaluation}, where projection quality is assessed in terms of preserved, reconstructed and unavailable information rather than simple object counts.

\subsubsection{Deterministic Projection}

The projection process is deterministic.

Given identical framework definitions, identical adapter versions and identical projection policies, the normalization process produces equivalent ACM representations. Consequently, the same configuration yields identical identifiers, canonical digests, relationships and governance inputs across repeated executions.

This property is essential for reproducible governance because lifecycle computation, assurance propagation and baseline validation operate exclusively on the normalized ACM representation.

\subsubsection{Extensibility}

The adapter layer intentionally forms the only framework-dependent extension point of the reference implementation.

Supporting an additional orchestration framework requires implementing a new adapter capable of producing valid ACM entities and relationships. No modification of the governance kernel is required, provided that the generated representation conforms to the ACM metamodel.

This architectural separation reinforces the role of ACM as a framework-independent reference model rather than an orchestration framework. New execution ecosystems can therefore be incorporated by extending the projection layer while preserving identical governance semantics and validation algorithms.
```
\subsection{Governance Kernel}
\label{sec:governance_kernel}

Once a framework configuration has been projected into the ACM metamodel, every subsequent operation is performed by the framework-independent governance kernel. The kernel constitutes the operational core of the reference implementation and realizes the normative semantics introduced in Sections~4 and~5 without relying on any framework-specific abstraction.

The kernel operates exclusively on normalized ACM objects and therefore remains completely independent from LangGraph, CrewAI or any future adapter. Its responsibility is to transform a validated configuration graph into a governed configuration by applying deterministic validation, propagation and runtime integration algorithms.

\subsubsection{Validation Engine}

The validation engine is executed before any governance computation.

Its purpose is to verify that the normalized configuration satisfies the structural constraints imposed by the ACM specification. Validation includes schema conformity, identifier consistency, reference resolution, relationship integrity and evaluation of the normative invariants associated with the ACM metamodel.

Validation is intentionally separated from state computation. Consequently, no propagated state is evaluated before the structural consistency of the configuration has been established.

\subsubsection{Deterministic State Computation}

After structural validation, the kernel evaluates the governance state of every Agentic Configuration Item.

The computation follows the semantic separation defined by ACM.

Intrinsic states are obtained directly from the configuration revision and associated evidence. These include lifecycle state, quality assessment and assurance state.

Derived states are subsequently computed by propagating information across the configuration graph. The current implementation evaluates impact, eligibility and effective governance state through successive iterations until convergence.

Because every propagation rule is deterministic and the traversal order is canonical, repeated executions over identical ACM configurations always produce identical governance results.

\subsubsection{Propagation Engine}

State propagation is implemented independently from the object model.

The propagation engine evaluates dependency relationships between ACIs and repeatedly applies the propagation rules defined by the ACM governance semantics until a fixed point is reached.

The implementation deliberately separates propagation algorithms from configuration models. Consequently, introducing a new ACI type or extending the metamodel does not require modifying the propagation strategy itself, provided that the associated dependency semantics are defined.

This separation improves maintainability while preserving consistency between the reference implementation and the normative specification.

\subsubsection{Canonical Revisions}

Every governed configuration relies on immutable revisions identified by canonical content digests.

The reference implementation computes deterministic digests from canonical serialized representations of ACM revisions. These digests provide stable content identities independently of object allocation or execution context.

Governance computations therefore operate on immutable revision contents rather than mutable in-memory objects, allowing baseline verification, replay and provenance reconstruction to reference stable configuration identities.

\subsubsection{Runtime Integration}

The governance kernel remains independent from workflow execution.

Runtime observations are received through normalized runtime signals emitted by framework adapters. These signals are interpreted as operational evidence and appended to the runtime history without modifying immutable configuration revisions.

The kernel subsequently reconstructs runtime graphs, evaluates runtime consistency and performs replay using normalized runtime information rather than framework-specific execution traces.

This separation preserves the distinction established by ACM between immutable configuration governance and append-only runtime observation.

\subsubsection{Implementation Characteristics}

The reference implementation follows a deliberately modular architecture.

Configuration models, state machines, propagation algorithms, runtime abstractions and framework adapters are implemented as independent modules communicating exclusively through the ACM metamodel.

This modular organization provides two important properties.

First, governance semantics evolve independently from supported execution frameworks.

Second, supporting an additional framework only requires implementing a new projection adapter, while the validation engine, propagation algorithms and governance semantics remain unchanged.

Overall, the governance kernel operationalizes the ACM reference model by providing a deterministic implementation of its normative semantics while preserving complete independence from the execution frameworks used to produce the original configurations.

\subsection{Governance Engine}
\label{sec:governance_engine}

While the governance kernel defines the architectural organization of the reference implementation, the governance engine implements the decision procedures that evaluate the governance state of an ACM configuration. Its objective is not to execute workflows but to compute, from a normalized configuration and optional runtime observations, a deterministic governance assessment that is reproducible across executions and independent of the originating framework.

The governance engine operates exclusively on immutable ACM revisions. Each evaluation is performed on a complete and self-consistent configuration snapshot, ensuring that governance decisions are always associated with a uniquely identifiable revision. This revision-oriented approach guarantees reproducibility, enables historical comparison between successive configurations and prevents governance results from being affected by mutable in-memory objects.

\subsubsection{Evaluation Strategy}

Governance evaluation follows a staged execution model in which each computation phase depends only on the outputs of preceding phases. This ordering eliminates cyclic dependencies between governance dimensions while preserving deterministic execution.

The evaluation process can be summarized as follows:

\begin{enumerate}
    \item validate the normalized configuration;
    \item resolve structural dependencies;
    \item evaluate intrinsic properties of every ACI;
    \item construct the dependency graph;
    \item propagate derived governance states until convergence;
    \item integrate runtime observations when available;
    \item produce the final governance assessment.
\end{enumerate}

Each stage is purely functional with respect to the evaluated revision. Consequently, identical ACM configurations always produce identical governance results.

\subsubsection{Dependency Resolution}

Dependency relationships constitute the foundation of governance evaluation. Before any propagated state can be computed, the engine constructs a directed dependency graph from the normalized ACM representation.

This graph explicitly captures structural relationships between ACIs independently of the source framework. Governance propagation therefore operates on semantic dependencies rather than implementation-specific execution graphs, allowing identical governance semantics to be applied to heterogeneous orchestration frameworks.

The resulting dependency graph is also reused for impact analysis, traceability queries and consistency verification.

\subsubsection{Fixed-Point Evaluation}

Several governance dimensions depend recursively on the state of related ACIs. Rather than imposing an arbitrary evaluation order, the governance engine applies iterative propagation until a stable configuration is reached.

Each iteration updates only derived governance properties while preserving immutable intrinsic states. Evaluation terminates once two consecutive iterations produce identical governance states for every ACI.

Because the propagation rules are monotonic and deterministic, the fixed point is unique for a given ACM revision, ensuring reproducible governance assessments regardless of execution environment.

\subsubsection{Governance Outputs}

The governance engine produces a governed configuration composed of the original immutable ACM revision together with its computed governance attributes.

These outputs include intrinsic and propagated states, dependency-aware eligibility, assurance assessment, governance diagnostics and runtime consistency information when runtime observations are available.

Rather than modifying the underlying configuration, governance results constitute an independent assessment layer that can be archived, compared across revisions or replayed from the corresponding immutable configuration snapshot.

Overall, the governance engine operationalizes the ACM governance semantics through deterministic algorithms that remain independent of orchestration frameworks while ensuring reproducibility, traceability and consistent governance evaluation across heterogeneous agentic systems.


